adding get started ambient doc (#12783)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/ambient/getting-started/index.md

owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers

> test: n/a

Reviewer: I think this would be a good doc to test.
```suggestion
test: yes
```

Author: Agreed test would be good, but probably not part of this PR and can be a follow up PR, because we are trying to put the ambient upstream announcement blog out asap.

---

> {{ warning }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< warning >}}
```

> Ambient is in alpha status, use at your own risk.

Reviewer: `use at your own risk` sounds scary :) How about:
```suggestion
Ambient is currently in alpha status, not intended for production use.
```

> {{ /warning }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /warning >}}
```

This guide lets you quickly evaluate Istio ambient service mesh. These steps require you to have
a {{< gloss >}}cluster{{< /gloss >}} running a
[supported version](/docs/releases/supported-releases#support-status-of-istio-releases) of Kubernetes ({{< supported_kubernetes_versions >}}). You can use any supported platform, for

> example [Minikube](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/) or

Reviewer: Is minikube really good enough? I thought minikube only allows one external lb service. IIUC, waypoint proxies use k8s gateway, each one of which will need an external lb.

Author: Yes, because waypoint proxy don't need external LB service.

    these four components are installed successfully!

    {{< text plain >}}
    ✔ Istio core installed
    ✔ Istiod installed
    ✔ CNI installed
    ✔ Ingress gateways installed
    ✔ Ztunnel installed
    ✔ Installation complete
    {{< /text >}}

## Deploy the sample application {#bookinfo}

You’ll use the sample [bookinfo application](/docs/examples/bookinfo/), which is part of
your Istio download from previous steps. In ambient mode, you deploy applications to
your Kubernetes cluster exactly the same way you would
without Istio. This means you can have your applications running in your Kubernetes before
you enable ambient mesh, and have them join the mesh without needing to restart or
reconfigure your applications.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f samples/sleep/sleep.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/sample-apps/main/sleep/notsleep.yaml
{{< /text >}}

Note: sleep and notsleep are two simple applications that can serve as curl clients.

Connect productpage to the Istio ingress gateway so you can access the bookinfo
app from outside of the cluster:

{{< text bash >}}

> $ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/bookinfo-gateway.yaml

Reviewer: Since this is new stuff, maybe we should document using k8s gateways, instead of Istio ones? https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/additional-setup/getting-started/#ip

Author: Our thought is that our existing user will also read it, and it would be important to show them existing APIs also work on ambient to minimize the impact to move to ambient.  We should definitely cover new APIs in the dedicated routing section as well.

Reviewer: Makes sense, but then it would probably be good to add tabs for both APIs, like all the other ingress docs. Seems less than ideal to show how to get started with cool new stuff but not using the latest of other cool stuff.

Author: That sounds good, we can add that in a follow up PR, in fact a couple of people said they wanted to help with this page :)

$ # this should fail with an RBAC error because the identity is not allowed
$ kubectl exec deploy/notsleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/  | head -n1
$ # this should continue to work
$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n1
{{< /text >}}

## Control Traffic {#control}
Deploy a `waypoint` proxy for the review service, using the `bookinfo-review` service account, so that any traffic going to the review service will be mediated by the waypoint proxy.

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply --service-account bookinfo-reviews
{{< /text >}}

Apply the reviews virtual service to control 90% traffic to reviews v1 and 10% traffic to reviews v2.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/virtual-service-reviews-90-10.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/destination-rule-reviews.yaml
{{< /text >}}

Confirm that roughly 10% traffic from the 100 requests go to reviews-v2:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl exec -it deploy/sleep -- sh -c 'for i in $(seq 1 100); do curl -s http://istio-ingressgateway.istio-system/productpage | grep reviews-v.-; done'

> {{< /text >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /text >}}

```

## Uninstall {#uninstall}

> Refer to our [uninstall instruction](/docs/setup/getting-started/#uninstall) to uninstall Istio and bookinfo sample application.

Reviewer: Also need to uninstall sleep/nonsleep. Why not just put the uninstall commands here?

Reviewer: and auth policy

Author: Updated!  :)

owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: n/a
---
{{< warning >}}
Ambient is currently in alpha status, not intended for production use.
{{< /warning >}}

This guide lets you quickly evaluate Istio ambient service mesh. These steps require you to have
a {{< gloss >}}cluster{{< /gloss >}} running a
[supported version](/docs/releases/supported-releases#support-status-of-istio-releases) of Kubernetes ({{< supported_kubernetes_versions >}}). You can use any supported platform, for
example [Minikube](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/) or
others specified by the
[platform-specific setup instructions](/docs/setup/platform-setup/).

Follow these steps to get started with ambient:

1. [Download and install](#download)
1. [Deploy the sample application](#bookinfo)
1. [Adding your application to ambient](#addtoambient)
1. [Secure application access](#secure)
1. [Control traffic](#control)
1. [Uninstall](#uninstall)

## Download and install {#download}

> 1.  Download the [alpha version of Istio](url) with support for ambient mesh.

Author: ```suggestion
1.  Download the [alpha version of Istio](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Dev-Builds) with support for ambient mesh.
```

    - role: control-plane
    - role: worker
    - role: worker
    EOF
    {{< /text >}}

1.  The `ambient` profile is designed to help you get started with ambient mesh.
    Install Istio with the `ambient` profile on your Kubernetes cluster, using
    the `istioctl` downloaded above:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ istioctl install --set profile=ambient
    {{< /text >}}

1.  After running the above command, you’ll get the following output that indicates
    these five components are installed successfully!

    {{< text plain >}}
    ✔ Istio core installed
    ✔ Istiod installed
    ✔ CNI installed
    ✔ Ingress gateways installed
    ✔ Ztunnel installed
    ✔ Installation complete
    {{< /text >}}

## Deploy the sample application {#bookinfo}

You’ll use the sample [bookinfo application](/docs/examples/bookinfo/), which is part of
your Istio download from previous steps. In ambient mode, you deploy applications to
your Kubernetes cluster exactly the same way you would
without Istio. This means you can have your applications running in your Kubernetes before
you enable ambient mesh, and have them join the mesh without needing to restart or
reconfigure your applications.

> {{< text bash >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< warning >}}
Make sure the default namespace does not include the label `istio-injection=enabled` because when using ambient you do not want Istio to inject sidecars into the application pods.
{{< /warning >}}

{{< text bash >}}
```

$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f samples/sleep/sleep.yaml

> $ kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/sample-apps/main/sleep/notsleep.yaml

Reviewer: This should be moved to the Istio repo.

Author: Created https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/43640

$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n10
$ # this should fail with a connection reset error code 56
$ kubectl exec deploy/notsleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n10
{{< /text >}}

### L7 Authorization Policy

Using the Kubernetes Gateway API, you can deploy a waypoint proxy for the `productpage` service that uses the `bookinfo-productpage` service account. Any traffic going to the `productpage` service will be mediated, enforced and observed by the Layer 7 (L7) proxy.
Install Kubernetes Gateway CRDs, which don’t come installed by default on most Kubernetes clusters:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io &> /dev/null || \
  { kubectl kustomize "github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/config/crd?ref=v0.6.1" | kubectl apply -f -; }
{{< /text >}}

Deploy a waypoint proxy for the `productpage` service:

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply --service-account bookinfo-productpage
{{< /text >}}

View the `productpage` waypoint proxy status; you should see the details of the gateway
resource with `Ready` status:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl get gtw bookinfo-productpage -o yaml
{{< /text >}}

> Verify that the waypoing proxy status is ready:

Author: ```suggestion
Verify that the waypoint proxy status is ready:
```

owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: n/a
---
{{< warning >}}

> Ambient is currently in alpha status, not intended for production use.

Reviewer 2: We need to define a consistent way of referring to "Ambient".  We used "Ambient Mesh" in https://istio.io/latest/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/ but @howardjohn was going to try and sort out if this was right going forward.  Bringing the same up on Slack.

Reviewer: I think we need to come up with a consistent way to refer to all of the ambient terms. Should they be upper or lower case, highlighted with back-ticks, etc., for terms like ztunnel, HBONE, waypoint or waypoint proxy as well as ambient itself?

I think this PR is good to merge now. We can fix up the terms and make other improvements in followup PRs.

Author: SGTM, thanks!

> {{< /warning >}}

Reviewer 3: we need to make this warning 10x larger. I will make a new PR

This guide lets you quickly evaluate Istio ambient service mesh. These steps require you to have
a {{< gloss >}}cluster{{< /gloss >}} running a
[supported version](/docs/releases/supported-releases#support-status-of-istio-releases) of Kubernetes ({{< supported_kubernetes_versions >}}). You can use any supported platform, for
example [Minikube](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/) or
others specified by the
[platform-specific setup instructions](/docs/setup/platform-setup/).

Follow these steps to get started with ambient:

1. [Download and install](#download)
1. [Deploy the sample application](#bookinfo)
1. [Adding your application to ambient](#addtoambient)
1. [Secure application access](#secure)
1. [Control traffic](#control)
1. [Uninstall](#uninstall)

## Download and install {#download}

1.  Download the [alpha version of Istio](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Dev-Builds) with support for ambient mesh.

>     If you don’t have a Kubernetes cluster, you can set up using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you don’t have a Kubernetes cluster, you can set up
```

    locally (e.g. using kind as below) or deploy one in Google or AWS Cloud:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kind create cluster --config=- <<EOF
    kind: Cluster
    apiVersion: kind.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
    name: ambient
    nodes:
    - role: control-plane
    - role: worker
    - role: worker
    EOF
    {{< /text >}}

1.  The `ambient` profile is designed to help you get started with ambient mesh.
    Install Istio with the `ambient` profile on your Kubernetes cluster, using

>     the `istioctl` downloaded above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the `istioctl` command downloaded above:
```

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ istioctl install --set profile=ambient
    {{< /text >}}

1.  After running the above command, you’ll get the following output that indicates
    these five components are installed successfully!

    {{< text plain >}}
    ✔ Istio core installed
    ✔ Istiod installed
    ✔ CNI installed
    ✔ Ingress gateways installed
    ✔ Ztunnel installed
    ✔ Installation complete
    {{< /text >}}

## Deploy the sample application {#bookinfo}

You’ll use the sample [bookinfo application](/docs/examples/bookinfo/), which is part of

> your Istio download from previous steps. In ambient mode, you deploy applications to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Istio distribution that you downloaded above. In ambient mode, you deploy applications to
```

$ kubectl apply -f samples/sleep/notsleep.yaml
{{< /text >}}

Note: `sleep` and `notsleep` are two simple applications that can serve as curl clients.

Connect `productpage` to the Istio ingress gateway so you can access the bookinfo
app from outside of the cluster:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/bookinfo-gateway.yaml
{{< /text >}}

Test your bookinfo application, it should work with or without the gateway. Note: you can replace `istio-ingressgateway.istio-system` below with its load balancer IP (or hostname) if it has one:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://istio-ingressgateway.istio-system/productpage | head -n1
$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n1
$ kubectl exec deploy/notsleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n1
{{< /text >}}

## Adding your application to ambient {#addtoambient}

You can enable all pods in a given namespace to be part of the ambient mesh
by simply labeling the namespace:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl label namespace default istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
{{< /text >}}

Congratulations! You have successfully added all pods in the default namespace

> to the ambient mesh. The best part is that there is no need to restart or redeploy anything!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the ambient mesh. The best part is that there was no need to restart or redeploy anything!
```

Send some test traffic:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://istio-ingressgateway.istio-system/productpage | head -n10
$ kubectl exec deploy/sleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n10
$ kubectl exec deploy/notsleep -- curl -s http://productpage:9080/ | head -n10
{{< /text >}}

You’ll immediately gain mTLS communication and L4 telemetry among the applications in the Ambient mesh.

> Follow the instructions to install [Prometheus](/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#installation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you follow the instructions to install [Prometheus](/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#installation)
```

and [Kiali](/docs/ops/integrations/kiali/#installation), you’ll be able to visualize your application
in Kiali’s dashboard:

> {{< image link="./kiali-ambient.png" caption="Kiali Dashboard" >}}

Reviewer: This is not the best diagram to use here, since it shows the helloworld service, while the instructions are using bookinfo :(

Author: Oh, my bad, i put in the wrong pic :) will correct :)

{{< /text >}}

## Control Traffic {#control}

Deploy a `waypoint` proxy for the review service, using the `bookinfo-review` service account, so that any traffic going to the review service will be mediated by the waypoint proxy.

{{< text bash >}}
$ istioctl x waypoint apply --service-account bookinfo-reviews
{{< /text >}}

Apply the reviews virtual service to control 90% traffic to reviews v1 and 10% traffic to reviews v2.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/virtual-service-reviews-90-10.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f samples/bookinfo/networking/destination-rule-reviews.yaml
{{< /text >}}

Confirm that roughly 10% traffic from the 100 requests go to reviews-v2:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl exec -it deploy/sleep -- sh -c 'for i in $(seq 1 100); do curl -s http://istio-ingressgateway.istio-system/productpage | grep reviews-v.-; done'
{{< /text >}}

## Uninstall {#uninstall}

To delete the Bookinfo sample application and its configuration, see [`Bookinfo` cleanup](/docs/examples/bookinfo/#cleanup).

To remove the `sleep` and `notsleep` applications:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl delete -f samples/sleep/sleep.yaml

> $ kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/sample-apps/main/sleep/notsleep.yaml

Author: ```suggestion
$ kubectl delete -f samples/sleep/notsleep.yaml
```
